Deputy Chief Executive Regional Development
and Commercial Services, and Joanne Taylor, who's our CFO.
Um, I only tend to make a few introductory comments, um,
on our 2024 annual report,
and then we'll be happy to take any questions.
So we're a schedule for company, um,
and we simply hold the assets that are, uh, that areed to us
by, uh, the government once they've
provided funding to, uh, various companies.
Um, 2324, contrary to what you may have heard in the press,
from our perspective, has been a pretty good year,
particularly given the difficult circumstances
that we have in the economy.
Uh, and we are pretty positive about the role
that we are playing in the regional economic growth story
as at the end of June, we have 200 active con contracts
totalling one just over a billion dollars.
Um, and as a result of the interest earned
and repayments received in 2024, we paid a dividend
to the crown of 19.2 million,
completed a share buyback from shareholding ministers
of 58 million and reduced the level
of unsubscribed share capital of 40 million.
So these actions improved the government's cash position
by $117.3 million.
Um, the,
the achievements set out in the annual report really focused
on our drive to improve the, um,
improve the outcomes of regional New Zealand
and a series of projects that we are enabling
through the regional infrastructure fund.
Um, we have done,
and you would've heard a lot of, um,
investment in the Eastern Bay of Plenty,
and that's the Portee Harbor Development.
It's one asset that is, uh,
is the largest in the Crown Regional Holdings portfolio.
Um, and that, uh,
is seeing some significant improvements in regional
employment, which we're very proud of.
Uh, hopefully later on this year, we'll see the, um,
the mussel farms, which activate the harbor
and the, uh, mussels program, uh, improve the, the lot of,
uh, broader cast of players in that region.
As I said earlier, we continue
to operate in a pretty difficult macroeconomic environment.
Um, and, uh, that has obviously an impact on our loan book,
but we, we operate in a space where, uh, we only play
where commercial lenders shouldn't, uh, don't play,
and we shouldn't play in, in any other space.
If the market will solve some of these problems,
then we shouldn't be playing.
Um, and as an example,
we were stepped into the North Island weather events,
and we responded by providing significant funding
to keep a number of businesses alive then.
Uh, so that's as far all that I was really pleased to say.
Um, I'd encourage, I'd like to acknowledge
that my fellow board members, it's a interesting
and, um, challenging space to do this,
to operate in regional economic development.
Um, and, uh, thank you to Robert and,
and Joanne for providing a very sound support to our ability
to try and manage this portfolio as best we can.
Thank you. I look forward to questions.
Thanks, John. Um, members questions? Um, Scott will,
Yes. Thank you. Um,
so one of the things that, um,
we're thinking about is how, how you are managing to, in,
uh, accurately value
or ensure that the new investments are, are valued
accurately, because there's, as you say, it's, it's a very,
um, impetuous environment.
Can, can I have a comment that
Bit? Um, sure.
Um, thank you very much for your question.
Um, we, so we work with the major accounting firms
to validate the basis upon which we value these investments.
So, um, every year there is a process that we go
through on the loan book
and the equity investments to assess whether there needs
to be any, uh, write down or write up
or value based upon the broad range of factors
that would be infected.
Those investments, not just, not just their cash positions
and their trading positions,
but the broader economy, the sector
that they're trading in competition, whole range of things.
And we have, uh, uh, one of the 4 1, 1 of the big quarters,
the loan book and the other, um, another one does the, uh,
equity investments.
And they've got sufficient information from the work
that they do in the financial sector to be able
to look at those and benchmark them against other
businesses, other banks, for example, uh,
to assess whether in fact we are valuing them correctly
and taking an appropriate view on those values.
Supplementary, That's actually a, not a primary.
Oh, the primary, yeah. Um,
maybe help, help me out here.
Mm-hmm. Um, crown Regional Holdings is, is essentially
not choosing the winners,
but is, is managing the contracts.
So if we see, so you're sort of, you're,
you're really responsive to where the direction is,
is heading through tunnel.
Is that, is that correct? Yes.
So, but is there any way for you to pass back, as you say,
your, your, you are arriving in places
where the market doesn't, doesn't wanna work.
Is there any way for you to be back to say,
we think there's, there's market failure in this region?
'cause we are certainly seeing market failure Yes.
In the regions.
That's a really good question.
Um, and, and look, it is, we,
we provide advice that accompanies the advice that goes
to ministers from Kano, from on projects.
Um, and we, at our board meetings, we provide our assessment
of what we're seeing in the regions that the board is
widely dispersed
and has, uh, regional economic development
footprint around the country.
And we're all really vitally interested in regional economic
development, otherwise we wouldn't take this challenge on.
So we do provide that feedback.
Um, uh, and,
but ultimately we don't get to choose,
even if our advice is we should do stuff
that often doesn't happen
because ultimately it's, uh, it's the, the,
the decisions are made by ministers
and we can simply provide our advice.
We, we provide it freely
and frankly, um, sometimes, uh, not in support of projects
that are put forward and some that, some that are, um, uh,
but, but we have got an interest in mapping
where we think interventions would be most helpful.
Um, examples of that are, um, and, and Robert
and his team do a great job with being the,
the wood processing sector,
which is really under stress at the moment Mm.
Um, at a system level. Mm.
And, um, we work hard with Kano to try
and figure out what sort of interventions might be required
to prevent wholesale dislocation of human capital
around the country, um,
which is a logical outcome if we don't find a solution.
Mm-hmm. Does that help? Is it, uh, supplementary?
Yes. A supplementary.
Supplementary, thank you. And so in terms of
economic growth, what are the, what are the things
that you consider do, do you have a narrow definition
of economic growth, such as financial return,
or do you, do you consider the wider impact such as job
creation, um, you know, um, healthy, healthy,
um, communities, um, the, the wider interpretation
of economics that absolutely provide for wellbeing?
Yes. Could you give an example, some
Examples? Uh, yeah. Okay. Thank
you. Uh, so generally speaking, the,
the government's funding is
to provide public benefit rather than
just commercial benefit.
If that was the only reason,
if commercial benefits were the only reasons we were making
those investments, we would quickly run up against
what the priority equity firms
and the commercial banks were doing.
So the schemes
and there've been 12 over the last eight years, have all,
even though the criteria have changed,
fundamentally they've been for a public good public benefit,
which means creating job opportunities,
creating training opportunities, improving the general
economic plight and,
and prospects for people in regions, um,
enabling emerging technology to, to move forward,
providing catalysts for, for businesses or,
or new types of businesses that, that are not able to raise
that last bit, or in some case, the first bit of, of capital
to actually generate these businesses to move forward,
to prove that this is an industry that we could,
that we can, uh, that we can help develop.
Uh, and a is an example of that.
I mean, it's terrible stats across every socioeconomic
dimension you can think of.
And this, the, the two big projects there,
and maybe there's a third one that we'll develop over time.
Were primarily aimed at those objectives
to try something different,
to move the diet for those communities.
Mm-hmm. Right.
A supplementary from a Kush.
Thank you Madam Chair. Continuing on, um, the reflections
and insights you've just shared
and using all portier as a really good, um, example of
the regional growth, the economic growth, the,
the positive social impacts.
What are the three key enablers you've learned
that could help transfer that sort of success
and enable that growth in other such communities?
If you could narrow it down to three,
feel free to share more.
Well, I'll start, I'll give John time to think.
No, I heard that. That's wonder.
I think that, um, the first lesson for me would be,
um, starting a new business,
starting a new industry in a community is not easy, right?
There are, there are real challenges, uh, particularly
to get people engaged
and becoming part of that workforce
who have four generations not had the opportunities to work.
And you have to teach people how to work, right?
It's, it's, we saw it happen in Northland under the, some
of the PGF programs.
You almost need to create a mentor, sponsor, uh, arrangement
with local people to help 'em understand what it means
to actually be part of the workforce, to be part of a team,
to actually develop, um, that combined effort
to achieve the, the, the corporate and the social goals.
So that would be one of the first things
that I think we've learned.
The, the, the second one, um, for me is
with the three year regional local government cycle,
be very careful when you sign up to the aspiration.
Remember, these were projects that were championed
by local government, by
and large, they, they came to us asking for support
to do these projects when mayors and, um,
and elected officials change quite often the political games
that get played and not necessarily provide continuity
for a project that is long
and duration, certainly longer than
the three year election cycle.
So we have to be careful at a system level to make sure
that we protect projects against change of governments,
which again, which are less about the regional, uh,
aspiration than about politicking.
So that's been, that's been a really insightful position.
And that would possibly also apply our investments in,
in te Maori.
And, and, uh, for fau, in that example, as the,
the commitments that were made to support fau, we have
to be careful to make sure that their aspirations at,
at a timeline level, meet those of
the fund to get things happening.
Mm-hmm. So the crown takes a disproportionate risk while we
underwrite people who have a much longer runway
to make their decisions to follow in behind us
than they may have, um, aspired to the beginning.
And the third, third, I think, is the fact
that Wellington doesn't know best.
Yeah. Wellington needs to work with the regions.
If you go in and dictate this is what you need to do,
there's a high probability to fall over.
Mm. As we've seen in all our, all aspects of life.
Unless there's a real drive from the local people,
the local community, this is what we want.
This is part of our DNA, how we make things better, then
you don't have that local commitment to support.
It doesn't matter how much money you put it.
Yep. So much. Um, thank you for raising here.
Um, because you know, as you all know,
there are often issues when, when
with Maori developments about multiple ownership,
uh, raising capital.
So what are the key things you've learned about enabling,
um, Maori business development
or supporting Iwi hapu development?
Yeah,
So we've, we've developed various ways of supporting
hapu and iwi businesses, including the Manama UA program,
uh, sorry, UA Maori program where
we have not taken security over the land,
which is the biggest block, as you know,
for raising money from banks.
And we've almost gone back to the model of how the stock
and station agents, if anybody can remember, David will,
how they used to operate in New Zealand, where they
provided the working capital for farms
and they recovered their, their working capital from part
of the milk check, part of the receipts from the,
from the fleece or from the, the grapes
and the apples that were run.
And we've taken a similar approach to try
and help fin Maori with long term capital that's weighted
for repayment once the business is actually generating
revenue again, uh, rather than looking for, uh, you know,
snappy repayments and, and interest rates.
Um, mm-hmm. And then I think on, on, in terms of, of fia,
it's been, uh, you know,
we'll stand alongside you until you've settled.
We'll stand alongside you until you're in a position so that
that opportunity can be developed ahead
of you actually having the cash
to tip into the business yourself.
Thank you. Alright. Um, members
Just remind that this review briefing is, um,
for 20 23, 20 24, um, annual we'll review.
Yeah. Uh, supplementary Dr. Hamish.
Excellent. Thank you. Um, and you talked about, um,
funding tech and emerging emerging industries.
Where does, where does your remit start
and where does it stop, uh, when it comes
to maybe other players in the field, like, uh,
New Zealand Capital Growth partners or,
or, or something like that?
How, how'd you work out where, where, where you,
your organization should be playing versus somewhere else?
Someone else?
Um, look, we, we make it, we, we, we,
we never play in a space we're not invited into,
and we will always default to existing partners,
but we are quite often asked to, um, to support existing
or potential technologies.
For example, we are private equity, happy to play in the,
uh, in the, uh, innovation IP space,
but require infrastructure, we,
we are probably better placed to support the infrastructure.
PE doesn't like playing in infrastructure
and hard assets, so we, it, it, it's a mix of those,
um, of those models.
But, but we don't, we, we are very careful not to crowd out.
Um, uh, I don't think we've seen any pushback from anyone
that we've crowded anyone out in that space.
Um, uh, because we are genuinely, we are generally seen
as the player that people,
because we don't push, we, these projects come to us.
If we are interested in a space that we might want
to see stuff, then we canvas that space to come to us.
So it's moderated in that respect.
Can you give us an example of one
of the projects you may have funded in this area?
In the, in the Emerging tech?
Uh, there's a Geo 40. Yeah. Yeah.
So Geo 40 is a, is a, an extraction of silica from, um,
from geothermal wells, uh, innovative, uh, technology.
And we took a quite a significant set, took 19 point,
$19.9 million.
Um, and, um, we enabled them to get
to their product.
They had, they had a test site
and they've developed that to commercialization.
They're now, um, it's not without traves,
it's a difficult rocky road as many of these are.
Um, but they're now come out the other side raised external
capital, and we will be, we've got first rights to get out,
uh, at the end of it when we're not needed.
And the idea for us is that we can then use that capital,
recycle it for new innovations as, as disruption occurs.
We need to be able to respond to those.
So, um, getting people up on their feet
and allowing them to have a chance as our, as our piece.
And we're not necessarily sit there to stay, monetize that
to its maximum, but to get back in
and help someone else. Mm-hmm.
That's good. So I'll ask, uh, next primary.
So as you said, John, in your, um, uh, opening remarks that,
um, economic time set up, we all agree with that,
but with that also comes risk management.
So can you tell us what have you done, like, uh,
anything you've done specifically in this year,
which is being reviewed
to manage risk given tough economic circumstances,
other than what you were doing before?
Well, we've, we've had a series of of risk reviews.
We, we have a risk register that is, um, is at front
of mind at every meeting.
And we, we moderate that
for emerging risks against our
portfolio, existing portfolio.
Um, so we, we present that at every board meeting
and that risk register is reviewed by officials
and then the board will sign it off
to make sure it's ex mixed.
It's understanding or sense of the risks
that are presented in the risk register accord
with the boards, um, the, the economic challenges,
seeing financial performance of firms move up
that risk register.
So that would mean that we are much more, we, we now have,
uh, a much deeper dive into the non-performing assets.
Particularly the important thing though,
that our members need to be aware of is
that we have a very limited tools.
We've got effectively no new money that we can support.
We can't support, um, uh, good, good firms that we want
to see, uh, want to see for the system benefit survive.
Um, so, uh, that's a, that's a bit of a problem.
Our tools are about making sure that we are flexible
around security repayments for those that are, those
that are worth supporting.
But there's also a fast fail element that we need
to be conscious of, that actually not all of the businesses
that we've supported should be continued
to be sort supported.
They've had to go at what they thought they could do,
haven't achieved it, and we would then, um,
and be inclined to fast fail those and,
and move, move on to something else.
So does that mean that you're planning
to add more performance measures, uh,
in here risk management plan?
I, I dunno whether there's any more.
Um, Dr. Powell, I think it's more about the,
the types of risks that are under review continues
to morph and develop as economic times,
uh, change.
Right. So I know we're talking about 2024,
but the most easiest thing to understand is
with the tariffs coming in from President Trump,
what's the impact that has on businesses in New Zealand?
How does that impact our portfolio?
So that's another risk that's emerged that we will now have
to take into account when we look at our portfolio
across different sectors.
But then to see how the risk is being mitigated, uh,
you have to have some kind of measure put in place.
Right? So how are you, are you balancing that?
Um, so that the, at the end of the day, it comes down
to the financial performance of the business in terms
of its ability to meet its obligations to us.
And, uh, those risks are constantly being assessed.
And where there is pressure on that business, just
as we see from the banks, we're looking
to see whether there's some form of mitigation in terms
of a moratorium on repayments, extending the payment terms,
flattening out the, the repayment profile
or whatever it might be to give good businesses the chance
to continue to trade, uh, to work their way
through the economic cycle.
So. Alright. Um, another question from,
Um, I think you made an interesting point earlier talking
about the challenge of the three year cycle
and politicking that happens when we are talking about
long run investments, investments for boosting
or building resilience in the economy in many respects.
Um, I'm wondering if we are thinking about
the challenge of the design from Wellington,
can you give some examples of where that, that has caused
entanglement or, or, or problems?
I mean, I'm, I'm certainly thinking of something
that's happened more recently,
which is the inland port at Moscow.
Um, definitely a decision from Wellington
that's caused a whole lot of rupture in the deep south.
Um, but in this period, have you got any examples of
where the decisions come from on high and,
and caused some challenges that you've had to had to manage?
I, I think that, uh, thank you that,
I think the biggest challenge we've seen is when there's a
new fund that emerges in the criteria change.
So when the provincial growth fund was established in
20 17, 20 18, that had a very, very broad remit.
Uh, and there weren't many parts of, well,
there were some sectors that were outta play and they,
and they remained to the state,
the three metropolitan areas, defense, health, housing,
police, you know, justice, the typical things.
But the funds since then have had,
have been more prescriptive in terms of either the sectors
or the type of, of, of assets that the crown
that the government wants to support.
So we've had ones that focus specifically on queenstown,
ones that focused on wood processing, ones
that focused on cyclone recovery efforts and,
and supporting agricultural businesses
to get back on their feet.
Uh, this one is very much focused on infrastructure, uh,
and hard infrastructure.
And so it's, it's quite hard for local communities,
local government
and local businesses to suddenly go, oh,
we've been working on this under the old scheme
and been working through our plans
and getting all the, all the work done to business case
and feasibility starts to justify that.
And then we get to a change
and the, the new fund has got different criteria.
I think that's one of the more
difficult things that we've observed.
Mm-hmm. And so you get quite strong
representations from local communities, government
and business about, well, can't you make an exception?
Or, you know, this is a really, really good project.
And that, that's,
that becomes quite a challenging conversation.
Alright. A sub entry.
And, and I guess, um, those conversations
perhaps are valuable
because you're, you are also getting a sense of
what the need is out there.
Yep. Is there a, is there a, uh,
any ability to, to modify, to adapt, to,
to change the criteria?
I'm, what I'm particularly thinking
of is the South Indian Future Program that has been underway
for such a long time
and the hard infrastructure questions are not
the priority immediately.
Mm. But for the success of that project,
it will require hard infrastructure,
but it needs that flexibility.
So is is there that, that, is there any ability to,
to modify, to, to be more adaptable, to meet
The need? Yeah, I
think we're in a tough place at the moment to move
outside the criteria,
but having said that, ministers,
the decision making ministers ultimately do have the ability
to say, this is a very good project
that the Crown should support
and can take that to whatever it is, the authorizing group
to make that, or to agree to that modification
or that variation I should say.
Alright. Uh, new primary from Dr. Debon.
Um, a little bit aligned to
what you were going with Scott.
Um, first of all, congratulations
for operating in a public good area, which is really,
really difficult when you're dealing with market failure.
Fully understand that I also was very interested, um,
as you know, when I was on the advisory panel,
but the difference between grants debt and equity.
So it'd be really good to hear from you around some
of the boundaries of those things
and what you've sensed has been, uh, very successful
between those three ways of, uh, of attaching those things.
And also, um, no, I'll leave it
to a supplementary, yeah. Okay.
Can I start that because this has been my hobby horse.
I think it's important for members to understand
that the genesis of the Provincial Growth Fund was
originally all going to be grants.
And, and David you'll recall this,
and we thought that was a,
that was not the smartest use of capital.
So we fought hard with treasury
to have the Schedule four company created
so we could have at least a chance of getting
this money back if it, if it was all grants,
we would have a very short conversation today
because all that money would be gone
with no chance of covering it.
Um, so we think we've, we've taken a,
a risk in going into this debt equity, uh,
and grant position, but we fight hard
to avoid providing grants
because the, for, for me, as a board member
and as chair, the virtue of having this capital recycle
for the benefit of future generations is as important
as enabling one project.
It's not enough for me that it's a system intervention,
not a individual firm intervention.
So I'm very firm on this and,
and I'll, I'll hand to talk more specifically about it,
but we have run a crusade against grants and, and, um, uh,
unless, unless they're absolutely necessary
and they are necessary, particularly for f Maori and,
and places where there is really, really deep market failure
and where the system doesn't support any, uh, any security
of any sort, but by and large we won't do that.
Yeah. Supplementary.
So, um, just in terms of loans on concessionary terms,
can you give us some sense of what that might look like?
Perhaps some example.
Do you want a go first or No?
Well, I'll start and then Yeah, I'll throw,
because we're pushing
The Boundaries here, Aren. Yeah, yeah,
Absolutely. That's
Big. So the, the
concession, so I go back to my earlier point.
What we've tried to do is not give money away
and just on the grants, we have seen examples
where some projects have been funded with grants and, and
because it was, pardon my firm, but free money Okay.
That the thing built,
but whoever the recipient was,
was normally local government.
There's been no planning around opex and the r
and m bill, which is ongoing, which
we were never in the business, right from day one
of funding opex,
it's always been CapEx in some way, shape, or form.
So, uh, and therefore, but then in, in structuring the loans
and equity investments, it was about
structuring in such a way that we weren't putting a burden
on the borrower from day one in terms of repayments
and financial obligations.
So the terms were concessionary, they were longer terms,
there was interest deferral or, or subsidized interest rates
or repayments were, were pushed out
until the revenue flows could support them.
That difference from a bank market position,
which is you pay interest on day one at four commercial
rates and you start repaying in 12 months time.
That difference is called the concession.
And that concession has a financial value
and that hits the balance sheet, sorry, hits the p
and l on the day
that the first draw down of a loan takes place.
You want to amplify on that or
Did Beautiful.
Um, I guess it's, it's an unusual, uh,
company to account for.
Um, I'm not quite pleased that the,
our auditors in the past have said we are unique.
I never thought I'd, um, go that far.
So most of our loans are concessionary.
We calculate that concession.
Um, internally there is a process to come up with
what a market rate could look like.
That's quite a different, well, it's a difficult process
because we, we don't have a market, so there is a lot
of judgment in, in how we come up with it.
There is judgment throughout the book
and that is why Audit New Zealand do the emphasis of matter.
There is a lot of judgment, but on the whole,
we follow accounting standards, we apply
where we can get independent judgements on what we are using
as far as discount rates, valuations, the likes, um,
and we present the accounts, we present a lot
of information in the accounts
so people reading them can kind of see
where those judgments are and,
and what assumptions we have made. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. And sorry, just to finalize Dr. Wilson, uh, just
for the members, it's not a write off, it's not
as though this is in default.
It's, it's just the way the accounting rules force
us to account for this.
And, and over time those concessions can be well back
and they come into the, to the revenue, uh, stream.
It's good members. Any other questions?
Looks like there are no more questions, so that's very good.
Thank you, John. Thank you Robert. Thank you, Joanne. Thank
You. Pleasure. Thank
You for your interest. Thank you.
Thank you.